Total pages: 75

===PAGE 1===
Dynamic Job Market Signaling
and Optimal Taxation
André Sztutman∗
October 29, 2024
Abstract
How should workers’ dynamic reputation-building efforts affect the design of
optimal taxes? To answer this question, this paper first presents a model in
which job histories play a crucial role in transmitting information about workers’
productivity. Workers’ reputational benefits from overworking to signal higher
productivity generate dynamic “rat race” externalities. The paper then provides
general optimal taxation formulas, written as the composition of a redistributive
and a corrective component. The latter depends critically on dynamic labor wedges:
the difference between the marginal contribution to output and the sum of current
and future benefits the worker receives from supplying one extra unit of labor.
Empirically, evidence from the Health and Retirement Study suggests a substantial
and positive corrective tax component, especially among high-income earners. JEL
codes: D82, H21, H23, J20.
∗Carnegie Mellon University - Tepper School of Business. Email: asztutma@andrew.cmu.edu. This
paper is based on Chapter 1 of my Ph.D. thesis at MIT. I am grateful for the guidance and support of
Jonathan Gruber, James Poterba, Robert Townsend, and Iván Werning. I also thank Daron Acemoglu,
LaurenceAles,JohnBecko,V.V.Chari,JonathanCohen,ArnaudCostinot,AshleyCraig,PeterDiamond,
Dave Donaldson, Lucas Finamor, Amy Finkelstein, Nicole Immorlica, Caio Lorecchio, Dylan Moore, Thi
Mai Anh Nguyen, Florian Scheuer, Liyan Shi, Ali Shourideh, Lowell Taylor, Aleh Tsyvinski, Bryant Xia,
ArielZetlin-Jones, aswellasseminarparticipantsatthe2024AEAMeeting, 2023NBERSIMacroPublic
Finance Workshop, 2023 IIPF Annual Meeting, 2023 SEA Annual Meeting, and 2022 EWMES, and the
various other venues where this paper has been presented. The HRS (Health and Retirement Study) is
sponsored by the National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA U01AG009740) and is conducted by
the University of Michigan.

===PAGE 2===
1 Introduction
Dynamicinformationalimperfectionsshapeworkers’incentivestoexerteffort, affectthe
income distribution, and, thus, impact the tradeoffs between efficiency and redistribution
from raising taxes. At first, foreseeing higher salaries in the future, workers exert a
great deal of effort even though their current salaries are small. As workers accumulate
experience, employers become able to recognize who the more productive workers are and
start paying them differentially (Farber and Gibbons, 1996; Altonji and Pierret, 2001;
Lange, 2007). However, employers may still be unable to distinguish between workers of
different productivity levels perfectly, and those workers may end up receiving the same
wages.
How workers’ incentives are shaped and how income is distributed are also primary
considerations in income taxation. However, standard benchmark taxation models often
ignore dynamic informational asymmetries, either adopting a stylized, frictionless view of
labor markets where workers’ salaries are equal to their marginal products or adopting
a static perspective on informational imperfections. This paper fills this gap, showing
how dynamic informational imperfections affect the equity and efficiency tradeoffs the
government faces when setting taxes. To achieve this goal, this paper i) builds a dynamic
signaling model of labor markets, ii) derives optimal taxation formulas in terms of sufficient
statics, and iii) empirically investigates the magnitude of information imperfections in
labor markets and their quantitative implications. Putting these three parts together,
this paper concludes that taking into account informational imperfections lowers the cost
of redistributing income, pushing toward higher marginal income taxes, especially at
the top of the income distribution. Moreover, there can be pure efficiency gains from
introducing age-dependent taxes, which would be higher for young workers and would
correct intertemporal distortions.
This paper begins by modifying a standard dynamic model of labor supply and demand
to address the connection between information transmission in labor markets, incentives,
taxes, and inequality. Two modifications are introduced. First, while firms can easily
see and pay for the execution of clearly specified tasks or deliverables, it is much harder
for them to assess the individual contribution of each worker to the firm’s total output.
Thus, workers are not paid according to their productivities, but according to the firms’
assessments of the value of workers’ contributions to output. Second, firms assess the
productivity of workers and the value of their deliverables by looking at resumes, which
parsimoniously summarize the history of deliverables the workers have produced so far in
their careers. When deciding how much effort to exert, workers in the model are aware
that working hard brings dual benefits: it generates larger payments today, and it also
establishes workers’ reputations, signaling their productivity to employers.
This paper then describes the structure of optimal taxes in terms of sufficient statistics,
1

===PAGE 3===
contributing to a growing literature on taxation with imperfect labor markets (Andersson,
1996; Rothschild and Scheuer, 2013; Stantcheva, 2014; Bastani et al., 2015; da Costa and
Maestri, 2019; Craig, 2020; Doligalski et al., 2023). I provide general optimal taxation
formulas that account for labor market imperfections, written in terms of sufficient
statistics. Intuitively, optimal taxes can be thought of in two steps. First, they correct the
informational inefficiencies by making sure that, for any extra unit of effort, the marginal
benefits to workers are equal to their marginal product of labor. Then, simultaneously,
redistributive taxes are imposed on top of these taxes following standard redistributive
formulas, where the costs and benefits of redistribution are expressed in terms of welfare
weights, compensated and income elasticities, and the shape of the lifetime income
distribution.1 Similar to Scheuer and Werning’s (2017) analysis of superstar effects, this
formulation allows us to turn on and off the background dynamic signaling effects while
holding the distribution of income and other observable moments fixed, and infer the
policy implications of taking into account the dynamic signaling effects. By performing
that exercise, we will conclude that the costs of redistributing income are lower than
we previously thought. Moreover, there may be pure efficiency gains from taxing young
workers and correcting intertemporal distortions that arise from disproportionally large
reputational gains from increased effort.
To illustrate the patterns for wages and the returns to experience, as well as the
nature of distortions that dynamic labor market signaling generates, two polar benchmark
examples are presented. In the first polar case, resumes are summarized by the cumulative
discounted sum of deliverables a worker has supplied so far, or its “length.” I show that in
this case, there are no intertemporal distortions, salaries are increasing over time for each
worker, and there are high-powered incentives to exert effort, that is, those incentives
are stronger than if there were no information imperfections. There are no intertemporal
distortions because the compensation for deliverables is independent of their timing. As
workers accumulate more experience, they are progressively bundled together with workers
who have longer resumes, and eventually, receive more than their marginal productivity.
In the second polar case, resumes are summarized by the amount of deliverables each
worker has generated per unit of time, that is, the “pace” under which each worker has
been supplying deliverables. I show that there can be separation: workers of different
types would supply labor at different paces, with more productive workers supplying work
at higher paces. Because of separation, firms offer salaries that, in equilibrium, are equal to
the marginal productivities, and therefore for each worker, salaries are constant over time.
However, that does not imply there are no distortions. In fact, there is another source of
benefits workers receive from exerting more effort, which comes from establishing their
1Moreover, these generalized formulas apply independently of the model of competition with imperfect
information or of the source of the friction that makes workers receive salaries that are not their marginal
products, as long as pre-tax earnings map one-to-one to the supply of the supply of deliverables.
2

===PAGE 4===
reputations and increasing the payments they will receive for future deliverables. Dynamic
signaling, in this case, also generates high-powered incentives, but these incentives decline
throughout the lifetime of the worker, and approach efficient, undistorted levels toward
the end of their careers.
This paper also studies the welfare impact and optimal tax response to recent techno-
logical changes that are reshaping how workers are monitored and screened.2 Building on
Stantcheva (2014), it is shown that if redistribution toward the poorer is valued by society,
society is hurt whenever there is less information asymmetry because it becomes easier
for high-productivity workers to separate themselves from lower-productivity workers.
Reducing informational asymmetries tightens incentive constraints and undoes part of
the implicit cross-subsidies that happen in labor markets from high-productivity workers
toward the lower-productivity workers. Moreover, the elimination of informational frictions
in general has an ambiguous effect on taxes, but in simple cases, it i) pushes toward lower
marginal corrective taxes, ii) pushes toward higher marginal redistributive taxes, and iii)
the first effect dominates the second.
The last set of contributions of this paper consists of empirical results about the
presence of information asymmetries, and the extent that they matter for taxation. In
that sense, to inform our discussion on redistributive and corrective taxes, the key statistics
we need to estimate are dynamic labor wedges, that is, the difference between the marginal
productivity of workers and the sum of salaries and future salary increases that results
from exerting extra effort. While estimating dynamic labor wedges goes beyond the scope
of this paper, this paper estimates static labor wedges, that is, the ratio of marginal
productivities over salaries. Surprisingly, in light of the results from our first polar case,
where resumes are summarized by their “length,” the static labor wedge for the last unit
of labor a worker supplies is in fact a sufficient statistic for the dynamic labor wedges, and
it offers all the estimates for the size of the Pigouvian taxes on lifetime income that are
necessary to correct for the dynamic “rat race.” Moreover, the other polar example, where
resumes are summarized by their “pace,” tells us that incentives are even stronger at earlier
moments in the career of workers and suggests that the average Pigouvian correction
should be even larger once we take into account additional intertemporal distortions.
To estimate labor wedges, this paper develops empirical strategies that rely on tax
changes as a source of exogenous variation in wages and that use data from the Health
and Retirement Study survey. We adapt results from the literature that has quantified
the degree of adverse selection in insurance markets by leveraging exogenous variation in
prices (as in Einav et al. (2010); Einav and Finkelstein (2011); Cabral et al. (2022)). In
the context of imperfect information and career concerns in labor markets, the key idea is
2Thesechangesappearintheformofincreasingavailabilityofdataandnewtoolstoanalyzeit(Chalfin
et al., 2016; Autor, 2019; Acemoglu et al., 2020; Bales and Stone, 2020), changes in task composition of
jobs from the automation of routine tasks (Autor et al., 2003), and the advent of “new work” (Autor,
2019).
3

===PAGE 5===
that with a source of exogenous variation in wages for a specific labor contract, one can
non-parametrically trace the effects of selection by looking at average productivities of
workers who accept the contract as a function of wages.
To measure expected productivities in labor markets, two complementary approaches
are adopted. The first approach leverages the Health and Retirement Study data on
cognitive measures, treating them as proxies for productivities. We find that the pool
of individuals who keep working after a tax increase has better cognitive measures (as
measured before the tax change), in line with the idea that the changes in pre-tax salaries
induced by tax changes are due to selection, that is, changes in the composition of the
pool of individuals who are still working. This effect is also larger at the top of the
income distribution, in line with the idea that those informational imperfections are more
pronounced for high-paying occupations. The second approach is to treat hourly salaries
as the average marginal productivity of workers. Under this assumption, by observing
individual salary changes before and after a tax change, and by also observing the number
of people who dropped out of the labor force in response to the tax change, we can infer
the productivity of those who were originally almost indifferent between staying and
dropping of the labor force. Applying this strategy suggests that for an average worker,
the Pigouvian component of taxes is of the order of 5%, while for high earners, it ranges
from 10% to as high as 60%. Since we can think of optimal taxes as the composition of
a Pigouvian and a Mirrleesian component, the fact that the Pigouvian component is so
high implies that the redistributive component of taxes is relatively small. Therefore, by
taking into account the role of imperfect information in labor markets, we may conclude
that the current tax system is less redistributive than we previously thought.
Related Literature The taxation results in this paper build on the optimal taxation
literature that goes back to the seminal contributions of Mirrlees (1971); Diamond (1998);
and Saez (2001). More precisely, this paper contributes to a growing literature on optimal
taxation with richer models of labor markets. The literature has analyzed the cases of
educational signaling with complete (Andersson, 1996) or limited instruments (Craig,
2020), competitive screening (Stantcheva, 2014; Bastani et al., 2015), monopsonistic
screening and market power (Hariton and Piaser, 2007; da Costa and Maestri, 2019;
Hummel, 2021), moral hazard (Doligalski et al., 2023), multidimensional skills (Rothschild
and Scheuer, 2013; Ales et al., 2015), and rent-seeking (Piketty et al., 2014; Rothschild and
Scheuer, 2016). However, it has not analyzed the case of dynamic job market screening,
which is the focus of this paper. Methodologically, the closest papers are Scheuer and
Werning (2016; 2017), who show that standard optimal taxation formulas apply quite
generally, including a broad range of models where wages are endogenous. Relative to
these papers, this paper adds further generality to optimal taxation formulas, enriching
them to cover situations where labor market frictions introduce labor market distortions.
4

===PAGE 6===
In a similar way to the “principle of targeting” (Sandmo, 1975; Dixit, 1985; Kopczuk,
2003), the generalized taxation formulas in this paper hold when there are additional
labor market inefficiencies, independently of their nature, as long as the planner can infer
labor supply choices from income histories. In this paper, the results on welfare generalize
results from Stantcheva (2014), who draws welfare comparisons between economies with
“double adverse selection” – in the form of non-linear screening as in Miyazaki (1977)
– and economies where firms know the productivity of workers. This paper extends
the comparison to more general informational frictions, and to intermediate degrees of
informational frictions.
This paper also contributes to the theoretical literature on imperfect information in
labor markets. We add a normative perspective to the question of dynamic information
transmission in labor market. The dynamic signaling model here combines elements from
static models of the “rat race” as in Akerlof (1976) and Miyazaki (1977), and in Stantcheva
(2014), with elements from dynamic models of career concerns as in Holmström (1999);
Gibbons and Murphy (1992); Bonatti and Hörner (2017); Cisternas (2018), and Hörner
and Lambert (2021) among others. The assumption in this paper, that firms see and pay
for the execution of observable tasks, or deliverables, borrows from static competitive
screening models of the labor markets as in Miyazaki (1977). As in that setup, the quality
of the deliverable each worker provides is not observed, and thus individual contributions
to firm output are not observed. Firms can see the average output of workers but not
individual contributions to output, as in a team production setting (Alchian and Demsetz,
1972). In Holmström (1999), workers’ reputations depend on history of output itself. In
this paper, reputations depend instead on the history of completion of deliverables, and
are summarized by resumes. Furthermore, the idea that firms see a simple public signal
builds on the motivational rating setup from Hörner and Lambert (2021).
A more empirically focused literature has looked at how firms learn about the pro-
ductivity of workers and whether there are information asymmetries in labor markets
(Jovanovic, 1979; Farber and Gibbons, 1996; Acemoglu and Pischke, 1998, 1999; Altonji
and Pierret, 2001; Lange, 2007; Kahn and Lange, 2014; Cella et al., 2017; Aryal et al.,
2019). This paper provides new evidence on informational asymmetries in labor markets,
in particular for workers in later stages of their careers, complementing structural estima-
tion results from Kahn and Lange (2014). Additionally, a large literature has analyzed
dynamic labor supply decisions, human capital accumulation and on-the-job learning
(Heckman, 1976; Eckstein and Wolpin, 1989; Shaw, 1989; Altuğ and Miller, 1998; Keane
and Wolpin, 2001; Imai and Keane, 2004; Altonji et al., 2013). One key insight from that
literature is that workers would anticipate the impact of their labor supply decisions on
their future salaries. The same effect is present in this paper, where the dependence of
future salaries on current effort is alternatively explained by signaling.
5

===PAGE 7===
2 Signaling-by-doing model
Thispaperadaptsastandarddynamicmodeloflaborsupply, demand, andtaxation, by
adding the constraint that firms have limited information over the workers’ productivities
and can only contract based on a subset of the observed activities workers perform.3
We focus on one specialized version of the general model that allows us to derive clear
comparativestaticsandsimpleoptimaltaxformulas, whileretainingtheessentialeconomic
assumptions that describe dynamic job market signaling. Employers will see a worker’s
resume – a single scalar that summarizes the history of completion of deliverables from
a worker at each point in their career – and will pay workers for the execution of these
deliverables. Workers, aware of how their resumes will be read, will choose their labor
supply balancing costs and benefits, which include current wages and future wage increases.
Appendix B.2, will consider several departures from this simple model, including human
capital accumulation and richer signal structures.
2.1 Preferences and Technology
The household block of the model consists of a continuum of overlapping generations
of workers with finite lives. These workers have arbitrary preferences over labor and
consumption flows, and are forward-looking: they understand that their labor supply
choices can affect the information firms will have about them in the future. The production
block of the model is described by competitive firms with linear production functions.
More formally, workers in each cohort are indexed by their types θ, which determines
their productivity and their preferences. Each worker lives for a continuum of periods
that goes from zero to one, where zero corresponds to the time the worker is born and
one corresponds to the time their life ends. At each period, workers of all ages coexist.
˜
They supply labor (h) and consume (c˜) at each period. c˜denotes the flow of consumption
function c˜: [0,1] 7→ R+, and h ˜ denotes the flow of labor supply function h ˜ : [0,1] 7→ R+.
The histories of consumption and labor supply up to age a are denoted c˜a and h ˜a, i.e.
c˜a : [0,a] 7→ R+, and h ˜a : [0,a] 7→ R+, are the c˜and h ˜ functions restricted to the domain
[0,a]. An individual of type θ has a productivity v(θ) > 0, and production is linear; that
is, the flow of production is equal to the product of productivities and the labor supply
˜ ˜ ˜
h. Preferences are denoted U(c˜,h,θ), where c˜ and h are, respectively, the time-flow of
consumption function and the time-flow of labor supply function.
The worker problem is standard: they maximize a utility functional, subject to a
lifetime budget constraint, where flows in the future, at age a, are discounted at the rate
3The model is a counterpart of the Arrow (1962) learning-by-doing model, where instead of affecting
humancapital,thecompletionofdeliverablesaffectonlyemployers’perceptionsoftheworkerproductivity.
This connection is especially clear in the special case where the resume is defined as the cumulative sum
of deliverables a worker has produced. For this reason, we can call it a “signaling-by-doing model.”
6

===PAGE 8===
q(a),4 as in Equation 1. However, salaries w depend on the information the firms have
˜
about the worker I(h,a,θ), which will be specified below, but more generally could be a
˜
function of the flow of labor supply across all the periods h, the type θ and age a of the
worker. This captures the possibility that the workers may want to change their labor
supply to influence their future salaries, by changing the employers’ perceptions of their
productivities.
Z 1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
˜ ˜ ˜
V = max U(c˜,h,θ) st. q(a) c˜(a)−w(I(h,a,θ))h(a)−T(y˜,a) da ≤ 0 (1)
c˜,h˜ 0
Notice that a standard life cycle labor supply problem features as a special case of
this, where wages are equal to the productivity of the worker, and this productivity
would be independent of their labor supply decisions. Notice as well that human capital
accumulation of the form of on-the-job learning would generate analogous concerns for
the worker, with labor supply decisions affecting future wages through real increases in
their productivities.
Workers pay taxes T(y˜,a) on their income flows y˜, which are the product of their
˜
wages w and the flow of labor supply h. Those taxes can be used to shape incentives and
redistribute income. They will be discussed in more detail in Section 4.
2.2 Contracts and Information
Firms are constrained to offer short-term contracts; that is, firms pay workers for the
execution of a single deliverable. Firms, cannot individually assess the contribution of
each each deliverable from each worker to output, or the firm’s profits. That is, firms do
not observe workers’ types, productivity, nor the quality of the deliverable. Under that
˜
assumption, it is worth highlighting that what has been referred to as labor supply h
should not necessarily be understood strictly as hours or effort, but as what is referred to
˜
in this paper as deliverables. That is, h represents the specific piece of the information
that firms can pay their workers for.
To assess the quality of the deliverable of the worker, firms observe a signal of their
˜
past experience, I(h,a,θ). In the simplest case, we can think of that signal as how much
labor a worker has supplied so far, which is denoted by I(h ˜ ,a,θ) = h(a) = Rah ˜ (a˜)q(a˜)da˜,
0
or the length of the resume when the worker is of age a. This case will be discussed in
detail in Section 3.1. Alternatively, we can think of that signal as the pace under which
a worker has been supplying labor, I(h ˜ ,a,θ) =Ra h˜(a˜)da˜. This case will be discussed in
0 a
Section 3.2.
4These discount rates are assumed to be exogenously given, i.e. there is a technology for transferring
resources across periods at rates q, and that these rates are such that budget and resource constraints are
well defined; that is, the present value of resources in the economy is finite. While the first assumption is
not essential, the fact that the present value of resources is finite is important in guaranteeing that the
economy is dynamically efficient.
7

===PAGE 30===
Proposition 4. If the original tax schedule is optimal and the planner has redistributive
preferences, workers’ preferences are convex over leisure and consumption, and leisure
is a normal good, then decreasing information asymmetries in labor markets decreases
welfare.
Proof. See Appendix A.6.
The idea behind this result is that if the planner has redistributive tastes, then it sets
positive marginal redistributive taxes to transfer resources from higher types to lower
types, and the incentive compatibility constraints bind downwards (Seade, 1982; Werning,
2000). Whenever the degree of informational asymmetry in labor markets decreases, these
downward incentive compatibility constraints become tighter, as it becomes less costly
for the higher types to imitate the lower types. With less information asymmetry in
labor markets, the high productivity workers can use more of their previously unobserved
productivities to imitate the deliverable production of the lower productivity workers.
The impact on taxes is more subtle and it is discussed in more detail in Appendix
B.5. When resumes are defined as the cumulative discounted sum of deliverables, the
correctivecomponentunambiguouslyfallsforeachtype, becauseχ(θ) = v(θ) increases
E[v(θ˜)|θ˜≥θ]
proportionally more in the numerator relative to the denominator. In that vein, we can
think of a decrease in information asymmetries in labor markets as a force toward lower
taxes. However, the impact on the Mirrlesian component is in general ambiguous. Under
theparametricassumptionsofSection3.1,theeffectsofthePigouviancomponentdominate
countervailing effects on the Mirrlesian component in such a way that, holding fixed the
marginal value of transfers λ, optimal taxes increase as information asymmetries increase.
5 Empirical Evidence
The previous section has offered an understanding of the tradeoffs a government faces
between incentives and redistribution through the lens of simple sufficient statistics.
Surprisingly, in the first benchmark case from Section 3.1, where workers’ resumes are
summarized by the cumulative discounted sum of deliverables they have supplied so far in
their careers, for the government to correct for the dynamic rat race distortions it is not
necessary to keep track of the ratio of marginal productivities over salaries throughout the
lifetime of the worker. Instead, it is enough to look at the ratio of marginal productivities
over salaries for the last unit of labor that workers supply, that is, around the time of their
retirement. This section estimates this ratio, and provides evidence that the estimated
labor wedges are driven by asymmetric information in labor markets.
Moreover, in the second benchmark case from Section 3.2, where resumes are sum-
marized by the pace at which workers have been supplying deliverables, it was shown
that there can be larger intertemporal distortions. In particular, there are high-powered
29

===PAGE 31===
incentives for workers to exert effort, but the high-powered incentives decline over the
career of the worker and reach the lowest level around the time workers supply their last
unit of labor. In that sense, we can think of the results in this section as providing a
suggestive number for the overall strength of the rat race, which in practice may be higher
at earlier stages of the career of workers, and may additionally generate intertemporal
distortions.
More generally, as discussed in Section 4.2, we would like to estimate the difference in
marginal productivities and the sum of current salaries and all future earnings increases
that result from supplying one unit of labor, at each point in the career of the workers.
While estimating marginal productivities over salaries is a difficult challenge, estimating
the latter is even harder. Direct attempts at estimating this richer set of statistics are left
for future work.
5.1 Data
To evaluate the magnitude of the signaling return to experience and the Pigouvian
component of taxes we use Health and Retirement Study data. The survey is a repre-
sentative sample of the US population older than 50 and a biannual panel covering the
period from 1992-2018. It follows about 20,000 individuals and it is rich on covariates,
including job histories, hours worked, education, cognition, measures of lifetime income,
and geographic, industry, and occupation variables.
There were several state and federal tax reforms over the period, which we are going
to explore as a source of exogenous variation in wages.29 To explore that variation, we
construct simulated changes in marginal rates at original income levels by assigning a
wide range of income, consumption and demographic variables from HRS to inputs in the
NBER tax simulator (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993), extending the procedure developed by
Pantoja et al. (2018).30
5.2 Empirical Strategy and Results
Our approach builds on the literature that has quantified the degree of adverse selection
in markets described by simple Akerlof (1970) lemons conditions, such as Einav et al.
(2010). In the context of health insurance markets they analyze, the key argument is that
with a source of exogenous variation in prices, one can non-parametrically trace the shape
of the cost curve for the insurance contract by looking at the average cost as a function of
prices. Translated into our context, with a source of exogenous variation in wages (for a
specific labor contract), one can non-parametrically trace the effect of selection by looking
at the average productivities of workers who accept the contract as a function of wages.
29Appendix C.3 presents these in more detail.
30A more detailed description of the mapping between the variables is presented in Appendix C.2.
30

===PAGE 32===
As the source of exogenous variation in post-tax wages, we will leverage tax reforms
at the state and federal level. To parsimoniously separate different labor markets, we will
pool together workers who, at a particular date, receive the same hourly wages, treating
hourly wages as a proxy for their resumes. Finally, to infer expected productivities, two
complementary approaches will be adopted. The first takes advantage of the rich set of
covariates available from the Health and Retirement Study and looks at cognitive measures
as proxies for productivities. The second assumes that labor markets are competitive and
therefore leverages the observation that wages would be equal to the average productivity
of workers with the same resume, as in the model presented in this paper. The first,
presents evidence that selection, and thus asymmetric information, are behind changes in
the pool of active workers. The second approach, while less robust, has the key advantage
of allowing us to assign a number to a key quantity of interest: the labor wedges and the
associated corrective component of taxes.
With that exercise, we will focus on the extensive margin of labor supply instead of
the intensive margin. That focus is motivated by the observation that changes in the pool
of workers with a certain resume driven by extensive margin responses are much more
salient than changes driven by intensive margin responses. In the first case, marginal
workers may either remain or entirely drop out of the labor force. In the second case, they
would remain in the workforce but generate slightly weaker or stronger resumes. In the
short run, these changes may be hardly noticeble to employers. Indeed, when extracting
labor wedges from salary changes we will be assuming that changes in the composition of
workers with a given resume coming form intensive margin effects are neglible relative to
the size of extensive margin effects.
5.2.1 Cognitive Measures
Inordertoprovideevidencethatthepoolofworkersischanginginresponsetoafter-tax
salary changes, we look at cognitive measures collected by the Health and Retirement
Study. Conditional on initial hourly wages, after tax decreases, the working population’s
average mental status scores (assessed before the tax changes) decreases, suggesting that
there is advantegeous selection.
Mental status scores in the Rand harmonized longitudinal files from the Health and
Retirement Survey are computed as the sum of vocabulary, naming, and counting scores
from the HRS. Those scores are the sum of correct answers from questions ranging from
“Who are the current president and vice-president of the United States?” to “How much
is 100 minus 7? How much is that minus 7? [...].” The detailed construction of the mental
status score variable is presented in Appendix C.4. Those measures can be seen as a
proxy for ability, similarly to how Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) scores in
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth is often used as a measure of ability (Farber
31

===PAGE 33===
and Gibbons, 1996; Altonji and Pierret, 2001; Lange, 2007; Craig, 2020). While the HRS
scores are less detailed, they have the advantage of being assessed repeatedly for each
respondent, at every survey year, and for that reason may be a more accurate measure of
ability if ability is not constant but evolves dynamically over time.
Looking at the HRS total mental status scores as a proxy of ability, we regress those
scores as measured two years before the baseline year, on changes in marginal retention31
and a set of control variables (X , including year fixed effects, marital status and flexible
it
functions of hourly wages), restricting the sample to those who are working in the baseline
year and four years in the future. The coefficient ηm on regression equation 16 translates
r
how different are the average mental status scores of those who are working after changes
in marginal retention.
scores = ηm∆logr +γ′X +u (16)
it r it it it
The results for different sets of controls are presented in Table 1 in Appendix C.1.
Fixing the set of controls, the results for different time horizons are presented in Figure 7 in
Appendix C.1. For a horizon of four years after the baseline year, under the most stringent
specification, we find that in response to a one percent increase in marginal retention
between the baseline year and two years ahead, there is a change in the composition of
the pool of workers such that average mental status scores (as measured before the tax
change) decreases by 1.3 points (out of 15), with a standard deviation of 0.5.
To estimate heterogeneous effects across different workers, we also estimate Equation
16 locally as a function of hourly salaries, which we treat as proxies for resumes,32 using
local polynomial methods.33 The local results are presented in Figure 2. They show that
semi-elasticities of mental status scores are higher in magnitude for high-earners.
31We focus on changes in marginal retention for three main reasons, as opposed to alternative measures
such as accrual rates of Social Security wealth (Coile and Gruber, 2007), the average retention rates and
their levels. First, retirement decisions do not necessarily take place at the beginning of the year, or
require the worker to receive no taxable income in the future, so that within a year that decision can be
though of as being similar to an intensive margin decision. Second, we want to capture compensated
effects more than income effects, since we can unambigously predict the sign of the compensated effects.
Finally, although in a dynamic context the changes in retirement incentives would be better captured
by a complex combination of changes in accrual rates from Social Security wealth, expected taxes and
salaries in the future, marginal tax rates are simple and easy to calculate with the help of the NBER tax
simulator (Feenberg and Coutts, 1993).
32For evidence of further heterogeneity across education groups, occupations, and income levels, see
Sztutman (2023), Chapter 1, Appendix 1.10.4.
33That is, for each hourly wage level y, we estimate the regression equation scores =ηm(y)∆logr +
it r it
β(y)∆logr (y −y)+γ(y)′X +u , where observations are weighted by their distance from the hourly
it it it it
wages level y where the equation is being evaluated using the Epanechnikov kernel. An additional
cross-term ∆logr (y −y) is included to improve on the bias-variance tradeoffs, as explained in more
it it
detail in Fan and Gijbels (1996). Optimal bandwidths are selected with the leave-one-out cross validation
procedure proposed by Racine (1993). Bootstrap confidence intervals are generated using the basic
bootstrap method described in Chapter 5 of Davison and Hinkley (1997).
32

===PAGE 34===
Figure 2: Semi-elasticities of mental status scores over different hourly wages percentiles
5.0
5.0−
5.1−
5.2−
percentiles of hourly wages
serocs
sutats
latnem
fo
yticitsale−imes
10 30 50 70 90
Notes. 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. Semi-elasticities are computed from linear regressions of
memory scores two years in the past on changes in log marginal retention rates over two years (evaluated
at the base year income data), restricting the sample to those who are working in the baseline year and
two years ahead. Each regression includes year fixed effects, marital status dummies, and a 10-piece
linear spline of log hourly wages.
5.2.2 Salary Changes
This section analyzes how salaries and participation rates respond to tax changes. By
imposing further assumptions, namely that salaries are equal to the average productivity
of workers, we will be able to quantify the importance of selection in labor markets from
the point of view of optimal taxation.
The basic idea is that, under the assumption that salaries are equal to the average
productivity of the workers, when we observe salaries before and after a tax increase, we
can decompose average productivities at the initial period as the sum of the productivities
of those who stay and of the marginal workers who dropped out of the labor force. That is,
E[v ] = E[v ](1−s )+v s ,where, E[v ] and E[v ] denotes the average
before after mg mg mg before after
productivity (or salaries) of the workers with a common resume, respectively before and
after the tax increase; s is the share of people who are induced to retire by the increase in
mg
marginal taxes, and v is their productivity. From that observation, we can also establish
mg
a relationship between labor wedges (χ), elasticities of salaries (ϵw) and semi-elasticities
r
of labor market participation (ηP):
r
E[v ]−E[v ]
χ = v mg = 1− aft E er [v after b ] efore =⇒ χ = 1+ ϵw r (17)
E[v ] s ηP
after mg r
To take the relationship given by Equation 17 to the data, we also have to address
the usual identification concerns that come from estimating elasticities. Thus, we will
33

===PAGE 35===
estimate elastiticities of wages by regressing individual changes in log hourly salaries
on simulated changes in the log of marginal retention rates, including different sets of
controls X (year-fixed effects, initial hourly wages, and marital status),34 as in Equation
it
18. The key identification assumption is that future productivity changes, and elasticities
of participation, are independent of each other and of tax changes conditional on the set
of controls.35
∆logw = ϵw∆logr +γ′X +u (18)
it it it it
The results of this set of regressions are presented in Table 1 and Figure 5 in Appendix
C.1. For the main specification, which includes year fixed effects, marital status dummies,
and a 10-piece linear spline on hourly wages as controls, the estimated elasticity of wages is
-0.16, with a standard deviation of 0.1, implying that a 1% increase in marginal retention
between years 0 and 2 causes a 0.16% decrease in salaries between years 0 and 4. The
effects are stronger at the 6-year horizon, with a point estimate of -0.27, and revert back
at the 8-year horizon to -0.14, when estimates also get noisier. This is in line with the
idea that marginal tax increases push the people who were almost indifferent between
retiring or not into retirement, and those people are less productive than the average
worker although they were receiving the same salaries. Salaries then would increase as
employers realize that there was a change in the productivity composition of the pool of
workers still on the labor force.36
To obtain estimates for the semi-elasticities of participation, analogously, we regress
changes in participation37 on simulated changes in the log of marginal retention rates,
34The controls aim to capture i) the possibility that changes in the tax schedule and in hourly wages
maybothrespondtobusinesscyclefluctuations(thustheinclusionofyear-fixedeffects), ii)thepossibility
that tax changes may have targeted different income groups and wages may evolve differently for those
different groups (thus the inclusion of log hourly wages, and other non-linear functions of hourly wages),
and iii) similarly, tax changes may have targeted differentially people of different marital status, for whom
wages may evolve differentially as well (thus the inclusion of marital status indicator variables).
35This assumption becomes weaker when we estimate heterogeneous elasticities by different groups, as
then the elasticities of participation need to be independent of future productivity changes only within
groups.
36It is common wisdom that workers experience most of their salary changes when they change jobs.
To more precisely capture the effects of changes in marginal tax rates on the wages of workers, we also
consider the effects of restricting the sample to only those who switch jobs over the relevant time period,
finding effects that are larger in magnitude, but less precisely estimated. See Sztutman (2023), Chapter
1, Appendix 1.10.4.
37That is, changes in the indicator variable that is equal to one whenever the individual is working.
34

===PAGE 36===
including different sets of controls, as in Equation 19.38
∆p = ηp∆logr +γ′X +u (19)
it r it it it
The estimated semi-elasticities of participation when including the full set of controls
and the 10-piece spline on hourly wages are of the order of 0.10 at the 2-year horizon, 0.01
at the 4-year horizon and 0.03 at the 6-year horizon, implying that at the 4-year horizon,
a one percent increase in marginal retention causes a 1 percentage point decrease in the
probability of a worker getting out of the labor force (see Figure 6 in Appendix C.1). The
relatively larger effects at the shorter horizons when compared to the elasticity of wages
is consistent with the idea that, after a tax increase, first, some of the workers drop out of
the labor market, and then, as the employers learn that the pool of the remaining workers
is more productive, wages gradually increase as time passes.
Our estimates are in line with a literature that has found that the implied tax rates
on labor income from public pension rules have large disincentive effects on work (Gruber
and Wise, 1998; Coile and Gruber, 2007). On the other hand, they are higher than
the substitution elasticities inferred from variation in Social Security benefits from the
1977 Social Security Act that created the so called “Notch generation” Krueger and
Pischke (1992); Gelber et al. (2016). While our confidence intervals are relatively wide,
the difference can also be explained by the fact that the substitution incentives of their
reform, and of Social Security benefits more generally, are relatively more opaque (Blinder
et al., 1980) than the substitution incentives from income tax reforms.
Under the assumption that the elasticities are constant across different worker profiles
– which will be relaxed below – we can take the ratio of the estimated coefficients
ϵw
r
ηP
r
(where ηP multiplies ηp by one hundred so that the numerator and denominator are in
r r
consistent units), to obtain a first set of estimates for the magnitude of the labor market
informational externality (1−χ). These results are presented in Table 2 in Appendix
C.1. Including the full set of controls and the 10-piece spline on hourly wages in both the
participation and wages regressions, the estimated negative informational externality is
around 0.16 when looking at effects over a 4-year horizon and around 0.015 when looking
at participation effects over a 2-year horizon. In other words, workers would be paid
around 1.5% to 16% more than their marginal productivity for the last unit of labor they
supply.
As in the previous section, we estimate Equations 18 and 19 locally as a function of
38Again, the controls aim to capture the possibility that changes in the tax schedule and in labor
market participation may both respond to business cycles fluctuations (thus the inclusion of year-fixed
effects), the possibility that tax changes may have targeted different income groups and labor market
participation may evolve differently for those different groups (thus the inclusion of log hourly wages, and
other non-linear functions of hourly wages), and similarly, tax changes may have targeted differentially
people of different marital status, for whom labor market participation may evolve differentially as well
(thus the inclusion of marital status indicator variables).
35

===PAGE 37===
hourly salaries, which we treat as proxies for resumes, using local polynomial methods.39
Then, we use these estimates to compute labor wedges χ (Figure 3). Since elasticities
of wages are higher in magnitude for high-earners, and high-earners also have lower
participation semi-elasticities, labor wedges χ are decreasing in hourly wages, in line with
the idea that informational imperfections are a larger issue for high-earning occupations
and jobs. The point estimate for the elasticities of wages suggests that at the top of the
distribution of hourly salaries the labor wedges could be very high, but also are imprecisely
estimated. However, the values come from a combination of high elasticities of hourly
wages and low participation elasticities, which approach zero, raising concerns about the
validity of the bootstrap confidence intervals. The general message, however, is that we
should expect the labor wedge χ to be decreasing across income levels, since they are
coming from a combination of, as a function of income, increasing elasticities of wages
and decreasing semi-elasticities of participation, which are robust features of the data.
Figure 3: Estimates for one minus the labor wedge for different hourly wages percentiles
(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:20)
(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:20)
(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:19)
(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:237)
(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:12)χ(cid:3)(cid:237)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:11)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)
(cid:20)(cid:19) (cid:22)(cid:19) (cid:24)(cid:19) (cid:26)(cid:19) (cid:28)(cid:19)
Notes. 95% bootstrap confidence intervals. Estimates are computed from the ratio of elasticities of
wages and semi-elasticities of participation. Elasticities of participation are computed from local linear
regressions of changes in log hourly wages over four years on changes in log marginal retention rates
over two years (evaluated at the base year income data). Semi-elasticities are computed from linear
regressions of changes of hours wages over two years on changes in log marginal retention rates over two
years (also evaluated at the base year income data). Each regression includes year fixed effects, marital
status dummies, and a 10-piece linear spline of log hourly wages.
39Thatis,foreachhourlywagelevely,anddependentvariabledep ,weestimatetheregressionequation
it
dep =ϵ (y)∆logr +β(y)∆logr (y −y)+γ(y)′X +u , where observations are weighted by their
it r it it it it it
distance from the hourly wages level y where the equation is being evaluated using the Epanechnikov
kernel. An additional cross-term ∆logr (y −y) is included to improve on the bias-variance tradeoffs,
it it
as explained in more detail in Fan and Gijbels (1996). Optimal bandwidths are selected with the
leave-one-out cross validation procedure proposed by Racine (1993). Bootstrap confidence intervals are
generatedusingthebasicbootstrapmethod describedinChapter5 ofDavison andHinkley(1997). These
results are presented in Figures 8 and 9 in Appendix C.1
36

===PAGE 38===
5.3 Comparison to Existing Evidence
In this section, we compare our estimates to the available evidence on the time patterns
of salaries and signaling on labor markets. We show that a back-of-the envelope calculation
using the existing evidence from the literature would result in a similar magnitude for the
Pigouvian component of taxes we found in the previous section.
There is documented evidence that workers experience large growth rates of salaries as
a function of experience. In fact, Guvenen et al. (2021) have documented that the top 1%
earners have a very steep growth rate of salaries, of around 2700% over a 30-year period,
or 11.3% per year (and approximately 3% per year on average across workers). While
part of this pattern may be thought as the result of human capital accumulation, and
another part of it may be thought of as the result of pure luck, it is reasonable to expect
that at least another part of it is due to selection and the career concerns logic we have
uncovered. In fact, Guvenen et al. (2021) argue that no empirically plausible model of
stochastic productivities could explain the large growth rates of salaries observed at the
top. Moreover, there is evidence that signaling and learning are important to explain the
dynamics of salaries and tenure in some occupations. For example, Cella et al. (2017)
have shown that the relationship between the volatility of stock returns and the tenure of
CEOs of large US firms is consistent with the idea that the market gradually learns about
the CEO ability throughout the years of the CEO tenure.
For the purpose of this paper, the key question is determining the share of the growth
rate of salaries that is due to signaling and how it can be translated into an estimate of the
corrective component of taxes. However, there is no direct estimate in the literature that
can readily be used to answer these questions. To get a sense of what would be reasonable
magnitudes for the signaling component of the growth rate of salaries, we can look at
the evidence on the return to schooling and the role of signaling in that context. Recent
work has concluded that on average 30% of the returns to schooling can be attributed
to signaling and 70% to human capital accumulation (Aryal et al., 2019). Combining
the growth rate of salaries for top earners from Guvenen et al. (2021) with the signaling
fraction of the return to schooling from Aryal et al. (2019), we can guess that the return
to experience due to signaling, for top earners, may be of the order of 3.4% (30% of 11.3%)
per year at 10 years of experience. Using Equation 3 (the free-entry condition for firms),
we can show that the return to experience is related to the Pigouvian component of taxes
(1−χ), and the shape of the lifetime income distribution by the formula γ = αy(1−χ) .
1+αy(1−χ)
This implies that the Pigouvian component of taxes at the top could be as high as 25%,
and on average around 6%.
37

===PAGE 39===
6 Conclusion
Whiledynamicsignalingisakeyfeatureoflabormarkets, standardbenchmarktaxation
models often ignore it, or adopt a static perpective on information transmission. In this
paper, we developed a simple model that allows job histories and resumes to play this
informational role, with firms using them to predict productivities and forward-looking
individuals making labor supply decisions that anticipate the impact of these decisions
today on future wages. The model builds a bridge between static models of the rat race
and dynamic models of career concerns. In the model, the interest from firms in learning
the productivity of workers arises even when firms are allowed to pay for performance
and both workers and firms are risk neutral.
We derived generalized Mirrleesian and Pigouvian formulas that apply not only to
this particular model of imperfect information in the labor market, but more generally to
models with labor market frictions, as long as, given how firms set their wages, earnings
map one-to-one to labor supply choices. The formulas decompose optimal taxes into two
components: a redistributive component, and a corrective component. While a large
non-linear income taxation literature has explored and estimated the statistics that appear
in the redistributive component of taxes, there is limited work estimating the corrective
component of taxes, especially in the context of dynamic imperfect information in labor
markets. Using data from the Health and Retirement Study survey, this paper has shown
that for an average worker, the corrective component of taxes is of the order of 5%, while
for high earners it ranges from 10% to as high as 60%. This result has implications for
the redistributive effects of the tax system. It implies that, once we take into account
the impact of imperfect information in labor markets, we may conclude that the current
tax system is less redistributive than we previously thought. Moreover, using the tax
system to correct intertemporal distortions from the dynamic “rat race” could generate
pure efficiency gains.
References
(2018). RAND HRS longitudinal file 2018 (V1) public use dataset. Produced by the
RAND Center for the Study of Aging, with funding from the National Institute on
Aging and the Social Security Administration. Santa Monica, CA.
Acemoglu, D., Autor, D., Hazell, J., and Restrepo, P. (2020). AI and jobs: Evidence from
online vacancies. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Acemoglu, D. and Pischke, J.-S. (1998). Why do firms train? theory and evidence. The
Quarterly journal of economics, 113(1):79–119.
Acemoglu, D. and Pischke, J.-S. (1999). The structure of wages and investment in general
training. Journal of political economy, 107(3):539–572.
38

===PAGE 40===
Akerlof, G. (1976). The economics of caste and of the rat race and other woeful tales.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, pages 599–617.
Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for "lemons": Quality uncertainty and the market
mechanism. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3):488–500.
Alchian, A. A. and Demsetz, H. (1972). Production, information costs, and economic
organization. The American economic review, 62(5):777–795.
Ales, L., Kurnaz, M., and Sleet, C. (2015). Technical change, wage inequality, and taxes.
American Economic Review, 105(10):3061–3101.
Altonji, J. G. and Pierret, C. R. (2001). Employer learning and statistical discrimination.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1):313–350.
Altonji, J. G., Smith Jr, A. A., and Vidangos, I. (2013). Modeling earnings dynamics.
Econometrica, 81(4):1395–1454.
Altuğ, S. and Miller, R. A. (1998). The effect of work experience on female wages and
labour supply. The Review of Economic Studies, 65(1):45–85.
Andersson, F. (1996). Income taxation and job-market signaling. Journal of Public
Economics, 59(2):277–298.
Arrow, K. J. (1962). The economic implications of learning by doing. The Review of
Economic Studies, 29(3):155–173.
Aryal, G., Bhuller, M., and Lange, F. (2019). Signaling and employer learning with
instruments. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Atkinson, A. B. and Stiglitz, J. E. (1976). The design of tax structure: direct versus
indirect taxation. Journal of Public Economics, 6(1-2):55–75.
Attar, A., Mariotti, T., and Salanié, F. (2011). Nonexclusive competition in the market
for lemons. Econometrica, 79(6):1869–1918.
Autor, D. (2019). Work of the past, work of the future. Technical report, National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. (2003). The skill content of recent technological
change: An empirical exploration. The Quarterly journal of economics, 118(4):1279–
1333.
Azevedo, E. M. and Gottlieb, D. (2017). Perfect competition in markets with adverse
selection. Econometrica, 85(1):67–105.
Bales, R. A. and Stone, K. V. (2020). The invisible web at work: artificial intelligence
and electronic surveillance in the workplace. Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L., 41:1.
Bastani, S., Blumkin, T., and Micheletto, L. (2015). Optimal wage redistribution in
the presence of adverse selection in the labor market. Journal of Public Economics,
131:41–57.
39

===PAGE 41===
Bierbrauer, F., Boyer, P., and Hansen, E. (2020). Pareto-improving tax reforms and the
earned income tax credit.
Blinder, A. S., Gordon, R. H., and Wise, D. E. (1980). Reconsidering the work disincentive
effects of social security. National tax journal, 33(4):431–442.
Bonatti, A. and Hörner, J. (2017). Career concerns with exponential learning. Theoretical
Economics, 12(1):425–475.
Cabral, M., Cui, C., and Dworsky, M. (2022). The demand for insurance and rationale
for a mandate: Evidence from workers’ compensation insurance. American Economic
Review, 112(5):1621–68.
Card, D. (1991). Intertemporal labor supply: An assessment.
Cella, C., Ellul, A., and Gupta, N. (2017). Learning through a smokescreen: earnings
management and ceo compensation over tenure. Riksbank Research Paper Series
Forthcoming, Kelley School of Business Research Paper, (15-18):15–02.
Chalfin, A., Danieli, O., Hillis, A., Jelveh, Z., Luca, M., Ludwig, J., and Mullainathan, S.
(2016). Productivity and selection of human capital with machine learning. American
Economic Review, 106(5):124–27.
Cisternas, G. (2018). Career concerns and the nature of skills. American Economic
Journal: Microeconomics, 10(2):152–89.
Coddington, E.A., Levinson, N., andTeichmann, T.(1956). Theoryofordinarydifferential
equations.
Coile, C. and Gruber, J. (2007). Future social security entitlements and the retirement
decision. The review of Economics and Statistics, 89(2):234–246.
Craig, A. C. (2020). Optimal income taxation with spillovers from employer learning.
da Costa, C. E. and Maestri, L. J. (2019). Optimal Mirrleesian taxation in non-competitive
labor markets. Economic Theory, 68(4):845–886.
Davison, A. C. and Hinkley, D. V. (1997). Bootstrap methods and their application.
Number 1. Cambridge university press.
Diamond, P. A. (1998). Optimal income taxation: an example with a u-shaped pattern of
optimal marginal tax rates. American Economic Review, pages 83–95.
Diamond, P. A. and Mirrlees, J. A. (1971). Optimal taxation and public production i:
Production efficiency. The American economic review, 61(1):8–27.
Dixit, A. (1985). Tax policy in open economies. In Handbook of public economics, volume 1,
pages 313–374. Elsevier.
Doligalski, P., Ndiaye, A., and Werquin, N. (2023). Redistribution with performance pay.
Journal of Political Economy Macroeconomics, 1(2):371–402.
40

===PAGE 42===
Eckstein, Z. and Wolpin, K. I. (1989). Dynamic labour force participation of married
women and endogenous work experience. The Review of Economic Studies, 56(3):375–
390.
Einav, L. and Finkelstein, A. (2011). Selection in insurance markets: Theory and empirics
in pictures. Journal of Economic perspectives, 25(1):115–38.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Cullen, M. R. (2010). Estimating welfare in insurance
markets using variation in prices. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(3):877–921.
Fan, J. and Gijbels, I. (1996). Local polynomial modelling and its applications.
Farber, H. S. and Gibbons, R. (1996). Learning and wage dynamics. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 111(4):1007–1047.
Feenberg, D. and Coutts, E. (1993). An introduction to the taxsim model. Journal of
Policy Analysis and management, 12(1):189–194.
Gelber, A. M., Isen, A., and Song, J. (2016). The effect of pension income on elderly
earnings: Evidence from social security and full population data. NBER Working paper.
Gibbons, R. and Murphy, K. J. (1992). Optimal incentive contracts in the presence of
career concerns: Theory and evidence. Journal of political Economy, 100(3):468–505.
Gruber, J. and Wise, D. (1998). Social security and retirement: An international
comparison. The American Economic Review, 88(2):158–163.
Guvenen, F., Karahan, F., Ozkan, S., and Song, J. (2021). What do data on millions of
us workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk? Econometrica, 89(5):2303–2339.
Hariton, C. and Piaser, G. (2007). When redistribution leads to regressive taxation.
Journal of Public Economic Theory, 9(4):589–606.
Health and Retirement Study (2018). RAND HRS longitudinal file 2018 (V1) public use
dataset. Produced and distributed by the University of Michigan with funding from
the National Institute on Aging (grant number NIA U01AG009740). Ann Arbor, MI.
Heckman, J. J. (1976). A life-cycle model of earnings, learning, and consumption. Journal
of political economy, 84(4, Part 2):S9–S44.
Holmström, B. (1999). Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective. The
Review of Economic Studies, 66(1):169–182.
Hörner, J. and Lambert, N. S. (2021). Motivational ratings. The Review of Economic
Studies, 88(4):1892–1935.
Hosseini, R. and Shourideh, A. (2019). Retirement financing: An optimal reform approach.
Econometrica, 87(4):1205–1265.
Hummel, A. J. (2021). Monopsony power, income taxation and welfare.
Imai, S. and Keane, M. P. (2004). Intertemporal labor supply and human capital
accumulation. International Economic Review, 45(2):601–641.
41

===PAGE 43===
Jovanovic, B. (1979). Job matching and the theory of turnover. Journal of political
economy, 87(5, Part 1):972–990.
Kahn, L. B. and Lange, F. (2014). Employer learning, productivity, and the earnings
distribution: Evidence from performance measures. The Review of Economic Studies,
81(4):1575–1613.
Kaplan, G. (2012). Inequality and the life cycle. Quantitative Economics, 3(3):471–525.
Keane, M. P. and Wolpin, K. I. (2001). The effect of parental transfers and borrowing
constraints on educational attainment. International Economic Review, 42(4):1051–1103.
Kopczuk, W.(2003). Anoteonoptimaltaxationinthepresenceofexternalities. Economics
Letters, 80(1):81–86.
Krueger, A. B. and Pischke, J.-S. (1992). The effect of social security on labor supply: A
cohort analysis of the notch generation. Journal of Labor Economics, 10(4):412–437.
Kurnaz, M., Michelini, M., Özdenören, H., and Sleet, C. (2023). Tax design in dynamic
discrete choice economies.
Landers, R. M., Rebitzer, J. B., and Taylor, L. J. (1996). Rat race redux: Adverse
selection in the determination of work hours in law firms. The American Economic
Review, pages 329–348.
Lange, F. (2007). The speed of employer learning. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1):1–35.
Mirrlees, J. A. (1971). An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation. The
Review of Economic Studies, 38(2):175–208.
Miyazaki, H. (1977). The rat race and internal labor markets. The Bell Journal of
Economics, pages 394–418.
Pantoja, P., Hayes, J., Hurd, M., Mallett, J., Martin, C., Meijer, E., Rohwedder, S., and
St.Clair, P. (2018). Rand hrs tax calculations 2014 (v2) documentation. RAND Center
for the Study of Aging, Santa Monica, CA.
Piketty, T., Saez, E., and Stantcheva, S. (2014). Optimal taxation of top labor incomes:
A tale of three elasticities. American economic journal: economic policy, 6(1):230–271.
Racine, J. (1993). An efficient cross-validation algorithm for window width selection
for nonparametric kernel regression. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and
Computation, 22(4):1107–1114.
Rothschild, C. and Scheuer, F. (2013). Redistributive taxation in the roy model. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2):623–668.
Rothschild, C. and Scheuer, F. (2016). Optimal taxation with rent-seeking. The Review
of Economic Studies, 83(3):1225–1262.
Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. The Review of
Economic Studies, 68(1):205–229.
42

===PAGE 44===
Saez,E.,Slemrod,J.,andGiertz,S.H.(2012). Theelasticityoftaxableincomewithrespect
to marginal tax rates: A critical review. Journal of economic literature, 50(1):3–50.
Sandmo, A. (1975). Optimal taxation in the presence of externalities. The Swedish Journal
of Economics, pages 86–98.
Scheuer, F. and Werning, I. (2016). Mirrlees meets diamond-mirrlees. Technical report,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Scheuer, F. and Werning, I. (2017). The taxation of superstars. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 132(1):211–270.
Seade, J. (1982). On the sign of the optimum marginal income tax. The Review of
Economic Studies, 49(4):637–643.
Shaw, K.L.(1989). Life-cyclelaborsupplywithhumancapitalaccumulation. International
Economic Review, pages 431–456.
Spence, M. (1978). Product differentiation and performance in insurance markets. Journal
of Public Economics, 10(3):427–447.
Stantcheva, S. (2014). Optimal income taxation with adverse selection in the labour
market. Review of Economic Studies, 81(3):1296–1329.
Sztutman, A. M. (2023). Essays on Public Finance and Information Economics. PhD
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Werning, I. (2000). An elementary proof of positive optimal marginal taxes. Technical
report, mimeo MIT.
Werning, I. (2007). Pareto efficient income taxation. Technical report, mimeo, MIT.
Wilson, C. (1977). A model of insurance markets with incomplete information. Journal
of Economic theory, 16(2):167–207.
43

===PAGE 45===
Online Appendix
A Omitted Proofs
A.1 Algebra Behind Example in Section 3.1
Salaries are given by the expectation of productivity of those who provide at least h.
In terms of types, salaries are given by w(h(θ)) = E[v(θ ˜ )|θ ˜ ≥ θ] = α θδ. The first order
α−δ
conditions of the worker imply that:
w(h) = h1/ϵb(θ)−(1+1/ϵ) (20)
Guessing and verifying that the wage is a power function, i.e., w(h) = khγ, for some k
and γ, we conclude that:
α
−δϵ 1−ϵγ
w(h) = k(1+ϵ)(1−δ)h(1+ϵ)(1−δ) (21)
α−δ
(cid:18) (cid:19) (1−δ)(1+ϵ)
And therefore w(h) = khγ, where k = α (1−δ)(1+ϵ)−δϵ and γ = δ , as claimed in
α−δ 1−δ+ϵ
the main text.
A.2 Atkinson-Stiglitz with “Double Adverse Selection” (Proof
of Proposition 1)
Proof. Any tax system generates a common budget set B that determines which pairs
(C,H) are feasible. As a first step in the proof, we are going to show that we can replicate
this budget set for the workers and save resources, without imposing taxes on timed
consumption or labor flows. To do that, we generate a new tax system where, for each
pair (C,H) the new pre-tax income is e(H) and post-tax income is e(C), where these are
described by Equation 24 and Equation 23, respectively. Under this new tax system, the
worker problem can be written in three parts:
max U(C,H,θ) st. (C,H) ∈ B, B = {C,H : e(H) ≥ e(C)} (22)
C,H
Z 1
e(C) = min q(a)·c˜(a)da st. C(c˜) ≥ C (23)
c˜ 0
Z 1
˜ ˜
e(H) = max q(a)·w(h(a))·h(a)da st. H(h) ≤ H (24)
h˜ 0
Notice that e(H) is the maximum pre-tax income that can be generated by generating
at most the disutility H. Moreover, it depends only on lifetime labor supply and not on
the timing of these labor supply decisions, because R1q(a) · w(h(a)) · h ˜ (a)da = W(h).
0
44

===PAGE 46===
Because production depends only on lifetime labor supply (and is increasing in lifetime
labor supply), it is also the maximum production that generates at most the disutility H.
Further, because e(C) is the smallest amount of resources that achieves the subutility
level C, and e(H) is the maximum production that can be generated by generating at
most the disutility H, whenever choices change, there are more resources than required
to obtain the same allocation. These extra resources can be used to increase all the
consumption possibilities (C +∆(H),H) by some small amount ∆(H), chosen in such a
way that resulting allocation is incentive compatible and the resource contraint is still
satisfied.
A.3 Invertibility Condition (Proof of Lemma 2)
˜
Lemma. Without loss, we can solve directly for R(h) = R(y(h)), and then find y(h), and
R(y). That is, the planner can solve the simpler problem:
max E[W(V(R ˜ ,θ),θ)] s.t. E[v(θ)h(R ˜ ,θ)−R ˜ (h(R ˜ ,θ))] ≥ 0 (25)
R˜(h)
Proof. Because y′(h) is a well-defined function of the allocation and is always positive, y(h)
always exists and y(h) is strictly increasing. Thus, there exists an inverse function h−1(y).
˜
Therefore, we can define R(y) so that R(y(h)) = R(h). Thus, we found the income tax
schedule and equilibrium salaries that prevail in the economy where the planner solved
˜
directly for the retention function R(h).
A.4 Optimal Taxes with Single Dimensional Heterogeneity (Proof
of Proposition 2)
Proof. First, we derive a necessary condition for optimality of the planning problem written in
terms of post-tax wages, where the planning problem is given by:
max E[W(V(R˜;θ),θ)] s.t. E[v(θ)h(R˜,θ)−R˜(h(R˜,θ))] ≥ 0 (26)
R˜
DefineL(R˜) = E[W(V(R˜;θ),θ)]−µE[v(θ)h(R˜,θ)−R˜(h(R˜,θ))],whereµistheLagrangemultiplier
on the resource constraint. Let’s consider a small one-bracket variation on marginal retention
rates as a function of effort at a given level of effort, i.e., let’s consider the consequences of
changing the tax schedule to R˜∗ = R˜+ϵ∆, where

 0 if x ≤ h
∆(x,ℓ) = x−h if h ≤ x ≤ h+ℓ (27)
ℓ
if x ≥ h+ℓ
45

===PAGE 47===
.
(cid:12) (cid:12)
ForanyfunctionalF,let d d r˜ F h ≡ ℓ l → im 0+ 1 ℓd d ϵ (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) ϵ=0 F(R˜∗). Moreover,denote d d F I ≡ d d ϵ (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) ϵ=0 F(R˜+ϵ∆ I ),
where ∆ (x) = 1,∀x. If the tax schedule is optimal, then, changing the tax schedule towards
I
the direction ∆ should not increase the value of the Lagrangian, i.e.:
dL 1 d (cid:12)
≡ lim (cid:12) (cid:12) E[W(V(R˜∗,θ),θ)]+µE[v(θ)h(R˜∗,θ)−R˜∗(h(R˜∗,θ))] = 0 (28)
dr˜
h
ℓ→0+ℓdϵ(cid:12)
ϵ=0
Denote λ(θ) = dW(V,θ),and moreover, under the assumption that lifetime labor responds at
dV
the intensive margin, Equation 28 implies:
(cid:20) dV(R˜,θ)(cid:21) (cid:20) dh(θ) dh(θ) (cid:21)
E λ(θ) = −µE v(θ) −r˜(h) −1(h(θ) ≥ h) (29)
dr˜ dr˜ dr˜
h h h
Let’s define dhc(θ) ≡ dh(θ)1(h(θ) = h), so that we can separate behavioral effects into income
dr˜ dr˜
h h
and compensating effects:
(cid:20)λ(θ)dV(R˜,θ) (cid:21) (cid:20) dhc(θ)
E 1(h(θ) ≥ h) = −E (v(θ)−r˜(h(θ)))
µ dI dr˜
h
dh(θ) (cid:21)
−(v(θ)−r˜(h(θ)) 1(h(θ) ≥ h)−1(h(θ) ≥ h) (30)
dI
Denote f(h) the density of lifetime labor h, and denote v(h) the productivity of the worker
supplying lifetime labor h, and ommiting the dependence on types:
(cid:18) (cid:19) dhc Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19) Z ∞(cid:18) (cid:19) dh˜
v(h)−r˜(h) f(h) = f(h˜) 1−λ(h˜) dh˜ + v(h˜)−r˜(h˜) f(h˜) dh˜ (31)
dr˜ dI
h h h
Now,writingitintermsofcompensatedandincomeelasticities,ϵc(h) ≡ dhcr˜(h) andη (h) ≡ dhI:
r˜ dr˜ h I dI h
h
(cid:18)v(h)−r˜(h)(cid:19) Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19) Z ∞(cid:18)v(h˜)−r˜(h˜)(cid:19)
f(h)hϵc(h) = f(h˜) 1−λ(h˜) dh˜ + f(h˜)η (h˜)dh˜ (32)
r˜(h) r˜
h h
R˜(h˜) I
Nowwearegoingtorewritethisformulaintermsoflifetimeincome. Let dF betheanalogous
dr
derivative with respect to a change in retention as function of lifetime income (instead of lifetime
labor supply). Notice that
r˜(h) = r(y(h))y′(h) (33)
And therefore,
dy(h) dh dr˜ dh
= y′(h) h = y′(h)2 (34)
dr dr˜ dr dr˜
h
Additionally, we can relate y and h, their densities, and their income elasticities by the following
equations:
f(h) = g(y(h))y′(h) (35)
dy(h) dh
= y′(h) (36)
dI dI
46

===PAGE 48===
1
dh = dy (37)
y′(h)
Substituting Equations 33 - 37 into Equation 32:
(cid:18)v(h)/y′(h)−r(y(h))(cid:19) Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19)
g(y(h))y(h)ϵc(y(h)) = f(h˜) 1−λ(h˜) dh˜
r(y(h)) r
h
Z ∞(cid:18)v(h˜)/y′(h˜)−r(y(h˜))(cid:19)
+ f(h˜)η (y(h˜))dh˜
h
R(y(h˜)) I
(38)
Which can be read as a function of lifetime income, where χ(y) ≡ v(y)/y′(h(y)):
(cid:18)χ(y)−r(y)(cid:19) Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19) Z ∞(cid:18)χ(y˜)−r(y˜)(cid:19)
g(y)yϵc(y) = g(y˜) 1−λ(y˜) dy˜+ g(y˜)η (y˜)dy˜ (39)
r(y) r R(y˜) I
y y
A.5 Conditioning on the “Strength of the Resume” (Proof of
Proposition 3)
Inthissection,weassumethatsignalstaketheformofh = I(h ˜ ,a,θ) = Raϕ(a˜,a)h ˜ (a˜)da˜,
ϕ 0
with ϕ(a˜,a) > 0, continuous in a and a˜.
Using the logic from Proposition 2 and the assumption of homogeneous preferences
over the timing of labor supply and consumption as in Proposition 1, we will show that
optimal taxation formulas will still take a simple structure.
We first set aside the issue of implementation, and characterize the set of optimal
incentive compatible allocations. Those allocations need to satisfy two properties, as
stated in Lemma 3.
Lemma 3. Any optimal and incentive compatible allocation satisfies two properties:
Efficient timing: For any H and C,
Z 1
h ˜ (·;H)1 = argmax q(a)h ˜ (a)da st. H(h ˜ ) = H (40)
0
0
Z 1
c˜(·;C)1 = argmin q(a)c˜(a)da st. C(c˜) = C (41)
0
0
Lifetime optimality:
(cid:18) v(θ)−r˜(e ) (cid:19) Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19) Z ∞(cid:18) v(θ)−r˜(e˜ ) (cid:19)
H f(e )e ϵc(e )= f(e ) 1−λ(e˜ ) de˜ + H f(e˜ )η (e˜ )de˜
r˜(e ) H H r˜ H H H H R˜(e˜ ) H I H H
H eH eH H
(42)
47

===PAGE 49===
˜
where R(e ) = e , and
H C
Z 1
˜ ˜
e = e(H) =max q(a)h(a)da st. H(h) = H (43)
H
h˜ 0
Z 1
e = e(C) =min q(a)c˜(a)da st. C(c˜) = C (44)
C
c˜ 0
Proof. Efficient timing follows from an analogous argument to the production efficiency
theorem of Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) (see also Lemma 7, below).
That is, consider the planning problem
maxE[W(U(C(c˜ ),H(h ˜ ),θ),θ)] (45)
θ θ
c˜ ,h˜
θ θ
Z 1
s.t.E[v(θ) q(a)(h ˜ (a)−c˜(a))da] ≥ 0
θ θ
0
U(C(c˜ ),H(h ˜ ),θ) ≥ U(C(c˜ ),H(h ˜ ),θ) ∀θ,θ′
θ θ θ′ θ′
We claim that any solution of this problem is a solution to the problem below, where
˜
we divide it into two parts, one where we solve for C = C(c˜ ), and H = H(h )), and the
θ θ θ θ
other where we think of the optimal way to achieve each (C ,H ) pair.
θ θ
max E[W(U(C ,H ,θ),θ)] st E[v(θ)e(H )−e(C )] = 0 (46)
θ θ θ θ
C ,H
θ θ
U(C ,H ,θ) ≥ U(C ,H ,θ) ∀θ,θ′
θ θ′ θ′ θ′
Where e(H ) and e(C ) satisfy Equations 43 and 44, with H = H , and C = C .
θ θ θ θ
Why? Suppose it is not. Then, fix original C ,H , but set c˜ = c˜(·;C )1 and
θ θ θ θ 0
h ˜ = h ˜ (·;H )1 as the solution to the sub problems 40 and 41. This does not affect
θ θ 0
the incentive compatibility constraints, but saves resources. That implies the resource
˜
constraint is slack and we can find a better solution. In particular, let R to be the implicit
˜
retention map generated by the original candidate solution, i.e, C = R(H ). We can
θ θ
˜
increase R uniformly, and for a sufficiently small increase, given the continuity of worker
choices, the resource constraint will still be satisfied. This generates a Pareto improvement,
and improves the objective function of the planner, contradicting the optimality of the
original C ,H .
θ θ
Now to prove the second part of the claim (“lifetime optimality”), we proceed to make
˜
a standard variational argument over the retention schedule R, for the problem 47 de-
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
fined below, where, V(R,θ) = maxU(R(e ),e ,θ) , e (R,θ) = argmaxU(R(e ),e ,θ),
H H H H H
eH eH
˜ ˜
U(e ,e ,θ) = U(C,H,θ), and e = R(e ).
C H C H
max E[W(V(R ˜ ,θ),θ)] s.t. E[v(θ)e (R ˜ ,θ)−R ˜ (e (R ˜ ,θ))] = 0 (47)
H H
R˜
48

===PAGE 50===
Assuming that no bunching takes place at the optimal assignment, and following the steps
from the proof of Proposition 2, we conclude that the following condition is necessary:
(cid:18) v(θ)−r˜(e ) (cid:19) Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19) Z ∞(cid:18) v(θ)−r˜(e˜ ) (cid:19)
H f(e )e ϵc(e )= f(e ) 1−λ(e˜ ) de˜ + H f(e˜ )η (e˜ )de˜ .
r˜(e ) H H r˜ H H H H r˜(e˜ ) H I H H
H eH eH H
(48)
Lemma 4. Assuming d2H(h˜(·)1 0 ) < 0 , MRS(C,H,θ) ≡ −UH(C,H,θ) decreasing in θ,
dh˜(a)dh˜(a′) UC(C,H,θ)
I(h ˜ ,a,θ) = Raϕ(a,a˜)h ˜ (a˜), salaries are increasing in I.
0
˜
Proof. Because MRS(C,H,θ) is decreasing in θ, for any R(H) strictly increasing – which
is a property of the optimal allocation described in Lemma 3 – higher types θ choose
d2H(h˜(·)1) ˜
higher levels of H. Since 0 < 0, higher levels of H imply higher levels of each h(a).
dh˜(a)dh˜(a′)
Therefore, conditional on age, higher types will choose strictly higher indexes, and thus
for any I > I′ and a > 0, E[v(θ)|I,a] > E[v(θ)|I′,a]. Therefore, E[v(θ)|I] > E[v(θ)|I′],
and salaries are increasing in I.
Lemma 5. No two different continuous functions h
˜
and h
˜′
map into the same y˜.
Proof. Remember that y˜(a;h ˜a) = h ˜ (a)·w(h ˜a) = h ˜ (a)·E[v(θ)|I(h ˜a)]. Consider the first
positive measure interval where h
˜
and h
˜′
differ, and without loss consider an interval
(a,a¯) where h
˜
(a) > h
˜′(a).
If salaries were the same for both functions, in that interval
y˜(a;h ˜a) > y˜′(a,h ˜′a), and the proof would be complete. However, by Lemma 4 salaries
˜
are increasing as a function of h(a), for any a; thus in this case we also have that
y˜(a;h
˜a)
> y˜(a,h
˜′a).
Therefore the different functions h
˜
and h
˜′
map into the different
earnings y˜ and y˜′.
Lemma 5 allows us to decentralize any allocation with the properties from Lemma 3.
Proposition 5. If R(y˜) is optimal then there are R ,R with R(y˜) = R (R (y˜), such
m p m p
that R and R satisfy the following conditions:
m p
dR (y˜) Z 1 dR (y˜)dw(h ˜a˜)
v(h
˜
)q(a) =
p
w(h
˜a)+ p
h
˜
(a˜)da˜, (49)
dy˜(a) a dy˜(a˜) dh ˜ (a)
(cid:18) 1−r (R ) (cid:19) Z ∞ (cid:18) (cid:19) Z ∞(cid:18) 1−r (R˜ ) (cid:19)
m p g(R )R ϵc(R )= g(R˜ ) 1−λ(R˜ ) dR˜ + m p g(R˜ )η (R˜ )dR˜ ,
r (R ) p p r˜ p p p p r (R˜ ) p I p p
m p Rp Rp m p
(50)
Proposition 5 states that the tax system should be such that i) history-dependent
taxes (R ) should be used to correct for labor wedges, and ii) after correcting for these
p
distortions, lifetime income redistributive taxes should be imposed on top of these taxes,
according to standard redistributive formulas.
49

===PAGE 51===
Where v(h
˜
) is the marginal productivity of the type that supplies h
˜
, and w(h
˜a)
is the
salary for someone with a history of labor supply h
˜a.
For ease of notation the dependence
on y˜ is omitted. That is, the formula should be read as a function of earnings flows y˜,
˜
through the inverse operator h(y˜).
˜
Proof. We have established that we can find the optimal post-tax wages R, by solving
the following problem:
(cid:20)Z 1 (cid:21)
max E[W(V(R ˜ ,θ),θ)] s.t. E v(θ)q(a)h ˜ (a;R ˜ ,θ)da−R ˜ (h ˜ (·;R ˜ ,θ)) = 0 (51)
R˜ 0
That is, we solve for the optimal post-tax wages as if there were a first layer of taxes
guaranteeing that the lifetime gains from increasing the labor supply are equal to the
contribution to output, i.e.:
˜ ˜
∂R (h)
p ˜
= v(h)q(a) (52)
˜
∂h(a)
In terms of earnings, we have that:
˜ ˜ ˜
R (y˜(h)) = R (h) (53)
p p
Therefore,
∂R ˜ (h ˜ ) dR (y˜) Z 1 dR (y˜)dw(h ˜a˜)
p
=
p
w(h
˜a)+ p
h
˜
(a˜)da˜ (54)
∂h ˜ (a) dy˜(a) a dy˜(a˜) dh ˜ (a)
and
dR (y˜) Z 1 dR (y˜)dw(h ˜a˜)
v(h
˜
)q(a) =
p
w(h
˜a)+ p
h
˜
(a˜)da˜, (55)
dy˜(a) a dy˜(a˜) dh ˜ (a)
To arrive at the special case with no intertemporal distortions, notice that having no
(pre-tax) intertemporal distortions implies that dRp(y˜)q(a˜) = dRp(y˜)q(a) for every a˜ and a,
dy˜(a˜) dy˜(a)
and therefore the equation above simplifies to
dR (y˜) 1 v(h
˜a)q(a)
p
= (56)
dy˜(a) q(a)
q(a)w(h
˜a)+R1 dw(h˜a˜)h ˜
(a˜)q(a˜)da˜
a dh˜(a)
Proposition. If resumes are summarized by their “pace,” under the parametric assump-
tions of Section 3.2, then dRp(y˜) = aγe−ρa, where γ = δ .
dy˜(a) 1+ϵ−δ
Proof. We have established that in the “pace-of-the-resume” case, for each worker, labor
¯
supply is constant over time, pre-tax salaries depend only on the pace h, and in equilibrium
are equal to their productivities. Denote the pace at age a as h ¯ (a) = Ra h˜(a˜)da˜. Equation
0 a
14 can be written as:
50

===PAGE 52===
dR (y˜) Z 1 dR (y˜)dw(h ¯ (a˜))
w(h ¯ )e−ρa = p w(h ¯ (a))+ p h ¯ da˜ (57)
dy˜(a) a dy˜(a˜) dh ˜ (a)
Using the fact that dw(h¯) = w′(h ¯ (a˜))dh¯(a˜) = w′(h¯), and defining the function r (a) so
dh˜(a) dh˜(a) a˜ y
that dRp(y˜) = r (a)e−ρa, we can rewrite it as:
dy˜(a) y
Z 1 e−ρa˜ w′(h ¯ )h ¯
e−ρa = r (a)e−ρa + r (a˜) da˜ (58)
y a y a˜ w(h ¯ )
Notice that under the parametric assumptions from Section 3.2, γ = w′(h¯)h¯ = δ .
w(h¯) 1+ϵ−δ
Taking a derivative with respect to a, we conclude that:
r (a)
r′(a) = γ y (59)
y a
And therefore r (a) = aγ, and dRp(y˜) = aγe−ρa.
y dy˜(a)
A.6 Welfare (Proof of Proposition 4)
Proposition 6. If the original tax schedule is optimal and the planner has redistributive
preferences, workers’ preferences are convex over leisure and consumption, and leisure is a
normal good, then decreasing information asymmetries in labor markets decreases welfare.
Definition. We say the planner has redistributive preferences if W(V,θ) = W(V) and
W′(V)U is positive and decreasing.
c
Proof. We can set the planner’s problem as maximizing a welfare function of workers
utility, subject to incentive compatibility constraints and a feasibility constraint.
Z
max W(u(c(θ),l(θ)))f(θ)dθ
l(θ),c(θ)
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) b(θ′)(cid:19)
s.t. u c(θ),l(θ) ≥ u c(θ′),l(θ′) ∀θ,θ′ [IC’s]
b(θ)
Z
(c(θ)−v(θ)b(θ)l(θ)f(θ)dθ ≤ 0 [Feasibility]
The incentive compatibility constraints translate the idea that under the results
from Lemma 2 (or the more general Lemma 4) the planner can solve for the allocation
in terms of consumption and deliverables h(θ) subject to workers not being willing
to misreport their types and trade their allocation (c(θ),h(θ)) to another allocation
(c(θ′),h(θ′)). Moreover, the amount of deliverables h(θ) is equal to the product of effort
l(θ) and observable component of productivities b(θ), i.e. l(θ)·b(θ) = h(θ). Therefore
the incentive compatibility constraints can be stated as requiring for each θand θ′ that
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
u c(θ),l(θ) ≥ u
c(θ′),l(θ′)b(θ′)
.
b(θ)
51

===PAGE 53===
In our context, the results in Seade (1982); Werning (2000) imply that out of the
set of IC’s, only the local downward are binding, provided that W′(U)U is positive and
c
decreasing, and that leisure is a normal good (they also further imply v−r is positive. For
more details, see Appendix B.5 and the argument in Werning (2000)). Those downward
incentive compatibility constraints become tighter whenever informational asymmetries
decrease, while the feasibility constraint is unchanged. Thus, welfare decreases.40 We now
walk through each of the steps of the argument.
First, we reproduce Werning’s argument succintly below, that local IC’s bind down-
wards, i.e. the lagrange multiplier on the local IC’s from the planner’s problem below
are positive. First, we replace global incentive compatibility contraints with the local
incentive compatibility constraints, and set up the planner’s problem above as:
Z
max W(u(θ))f(θ)dθ (60)
u,h
s.t. u′(θ) = U (e(u(θ),h(θ),θ),h(θ),θ) (61)
θ
Z
(e(u(θ),h(θ),θ)−v(θ)h(θ))f(θ)dθ ≤ 0 (62)
We write the Lagrangian and, for conciseness, we drop the explicit dependence on θ
Z
max W(u) f +µ(u′ −U )−κ(e−vh)f dθ (63)
θ
u,h
Integrate by parts
Z
max W(u) f −µ′u−µU −κ(e−vh)f dθ+uµ|θ (64)
θ θ
u,h
Take FOC’s for u(θ), and h(θ), denote λ(θ) = W′(u(θ)), and also note that µ(θ ¯ ) = µ(θ) =
0.
λf −µ′ −µU e −κe f = 0 (65)
θ,c u u
µ(U e +U )−ke f +kvf = 0 (66)
θ,c h θ,h h
Equation 66 can be rewritten as:
f v−r
µU /κ = r (67)
c ∂logMRS
∂θ
Now we show that µ ≥ 0. Suppose towards a contradiction that there is a θ such that
40The result does not depend on the particulars of the information structure. Besides holding in the
MWS case (as in Stantcheva (2014)), and in other models of competition with imperfect information
such as the competitive screening model in Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017), and in the case of our model
where resumes are defined as the length of the resume, it also holds under the more general information
structure of Section 4.2, where resumes take the general form I(h˜,a,θ)= Ra ϕ(a˜,a)h˜(a˜)da˜.
0
52

===PAGE 54===
µ(θ) < 0. Then, there is θ < θ such that µ(θ ) = µ(θ ) = 0, and µ′(θ ) < 0, µ′(θ ) > 0.
1 2 1 2 1 2
Thus from Equation 67, we conclude that for v(θ ) = r(θ ) and v(θ ) = r(θ ), that is,
1 1 2 2
they are unconstrained. Thus, it is also true that e = 1/U for θ , and θ . Equation 65
u c 1 2
tell us that when µ = 0:
1(cid:18) µ′(cid:19)
e = λ− (68)
u
κ f
Therefore, e (θ ) ≥ e (θ ),and U (θ ) ≥ U (θ ). Under the assumption that preferences
u 1 u 2 c 2 c 1
are convex and that leisure is a normal good, that would imply that u(θ ) ≤ u(θ ). That
2 1
is, however, impossible: Since θ is the more productive worker, that would violate their
2
incentive compatibility constraints. Therefore, µ ≥ 0.
Now, we claim that a decrease in information asymmetries as we have defined them,
makes the local incentive compatibility constraints tighter, and therefore reduces welfare.
Notice that we can rewrite the resource constraint (Inequality 62) as:R(e(u(θ),ℓ(θ))−
θℓ(θ))f(θ)dθ ≤ 0 and the local incentive compatibility constraints (Equation 61) as
(cid:18) (cid:19)
u′(θ) = −∂U(e(u(θ),ℓ(θ)),ℓ(θ))ℓ(θ)b′(θ) = −∂U(e(u(θ),ℓ(θ)),ℓ(θ))ℓ(θ b′ 0 (θ) + ∆′(θ) . The first is not
∂ℓ b(θ) ∂ℓ b0(θ) ∆(θ)
affected by a change in information asymmetries as we have defined them, and the second
constraint becomes tighter whenever information asymmetries decrease. Therefore, welfare
decreases whenever information asymmetries decrease.
B Additional Theoretical Results
B.1 General Positive Properties: Strength of the Resume
This section shows properties of salaries and the return to experience that hold under
a broader set of assumptions than those from the examples of Section 3. We focus on the
case where the resume is summarized by a signal of the form I(h ˜ ,a,θ) = Rah ˜ (a˜)ϕ(a˜,a)da˜,
0
with ϕ(a˜,a) > 0, bounded and continuous. In contrast to the previous cases, where the
signal was referred to the “length-of-the-resume” and the “pace-of-the-resume,” we say
that in this more general case the firms receive a public signal which can be called the
“strength-of-the-resume” of the candidate.
The first general property is that, for any preferences and distribution of productivities,
every worker starts their career with nothing to show in their resumes, and therefore the
strength of their resumes is zero. Therefore, everyone has the same initial salary, which is
equal to the average productivity of all workers. In particular, workers with above-average
productivity start their career earning less than their marginal product, as the average
productivity is everyone’s initial salary. All workers have to climb the same career ladder
and before they can show anything in their resume they are all indistinguishable for
employers. This is illustrated in the left panel of Figure 4, where the trajectories of the
53

===PAGE 55===
I I
I (a) I (a)
θ′′ θ′′
Imax
θ′
I (a) I (a)
θ′ θ′
I (a)
I (a) θ
θ
a a
1 1
Figure 4: Career of Workers. Left Panel: Initial Salaries, and Salaries at the Peak. Right
Panel: Signaling Return to Experience
“strength-of-the-resume” of different hypothetical workers are plotted as a function of their
age, and the pool of workers who just started their careers is highlighted in red.
Second, workers at the peak of their careers (when they reach the highest value of
the index Rah ˜ (a˜)ϕ(a˜,a)da˜) will earn more than their marginal productivity because they
0
will be pooled together only with the types that are willing to provide higher amounts
of deliverables across all periods. This is illustrated in the left panel of Figure 4, where
a dashed horizontal line shows the pool of workers who at some point in their careers
have a resume of a certain “strength.” Whenever this line is tangent to the highest
“strength-of-the-resume” a worker achieves, this worker will be pooled together only with
people who reach even higher “strength” levels and who are more productive than this
worker (under the assumption that those who are more productive are more willing
to supply deliverables). The left panel of Figure 4 raises the possibility that for any
individual their resume may deteriorate over time. This could appear as the result of
a worker failing to meet the expected pace of completion of deliverables. For example,
in the “pace-of-the-resume” case from the Section 3.2, if a worker decided to reduce the
pace of completion of deliverables, then the resume would become weaker; that would be
interpreted as if it was bad news about the productivity of the worker.41
Third, at any point, assuming more productive types are more willing to provide the
deliverables at all periods, exerting more effort increases future salaries. This is the case
because whenever workers decide to exert more effort and improve their resumes, they will
show to employers resumes that are more similar to the resumes of the more productive
types. This is illustrated in the right panel of Figure 4, where workers of a certain type
move from the dashed blue line to the solid blue line when they decide to exert more
effort at a certain age, and as a result they make their resumes stronger in all future
periods. This is a general property that will be satisfied in other information structures
as discussed in Appendix B.2.3.
41Moreover, if firms believe there is more human capital depreciation than there actually is, firms may
mistakenly discount too much experiences in the past as if workers human capital had depreciated.
54
